1. echo SRM ➔ to display the string SRM 
2. clear ➔ to clear the screen 
3. date ➔ to display the current date and time 
4. cal 2003 ➔ to display the calendar for the year 2003 
cal 6 2003 ➔ to display the calendar for the June-2003 
5. passwd ➔ to change password 

 

b) Working with Files 
1. ls ➔ list files in the present working directory 
ls –l ➔ list files with detailed information (long list) 
ls –a ➔ list all files including the hidden files 

 

2. cat > f1 ➔ to create a file (Press ^d to finish typing) 

 

3. cat f1 ➔ display the content of the file f1 
4. wc f1 ➔ list no. of characters, words & lines of a file f1 
wc –c f1 ➔ list only no. of characters of file f1 
wc –w f1 ➔ list only no. of words of file f1 
wc –l f1 ➔ list only no. of lines of file f1 
5. cp f1 f2 ➔ copy file f1 into f2 
6. mv f1 f2 ➔ rename file f1 as f2 
7. rm f1 ➔ remove the file f1 
8. head –5 f1 ➔ list first 5 lines of the file f1 
tail –5 f1 ➔ list last 5 lines of the file f1 

 

c) Working with Directories 
1. mkdir elias ➔ to create the directory elias 
2. cd elias ➔ to change the directory as elias 
3. rmdir elias ➔ to remove the directory elias 
4. pwd ➔ to display the path of the present working directory 
5. cd ➔ to go to the home directory 
cd .. ➔ to go to the parent directory 
cd - ➔ to go to the previous working directory 
cd / ➔ to go to the root directory 
d) File name substitution 
1. ls f? ➔ list files start with ‘f’ and followed by any one character 
2. ls *.c ➔ list files with extension ‘c’ 
3. ls [gpy]et ➔ list files whose first letter is any one of the character g, p 
or y and followed by the word et 

 

4. ls [a-d,l-m]ring ➔ list files whose first letter is any one of the character 
from a to d and l to m and followed by the word ring. 

 

e) I/O Redirection 
1. Input redirection 
wc –l < ex1 ➔ To find the number of lines of the file ‘ex1’ 

 

2. Output redirection 
who > f2 ➔ the output of ‘who’ will be redirected to file f2 
3. cat >> f1 ➔ to append more into the file f1 

 

 

f) Piping 
Syntax : Command1 | command2 

 

Output of the command1 is transferred to the command2 as input. Finally 
output of the command2 will be displayed on the monitor. 

 

ex. cat f1 | more ➔ list the contents of file f1 screen by screen 
head –6 f1 |tail –2 ➔ prints the 5th & 6th lines of the file f1. 

 

g) Environment variables 
1. echo $HOME ➔ display the path of the home directory 
2. echo $PS1 ➔ display the prompt string $ 
3. echo $PS2 ➔ display the second prompt string ( > symbol by default ) 
4. echo $LOGNAME ➔ login name 

 h) File Permission 
-- chmod command is used to change the access permission of a file. 

 

Method-1 
Syntax : chmod [ugo] [+/-] [ rwxa ] filename 

 

u : user, g : group, o : others 
+ : Add permission - : Remove the 
permission r : read, w : write, x : 
execute, a : all permissions 

 

ex. chmod ug+rw f1 
adding ‘read & write’ permissions of file f1 to both user 
and group members. 

 

Method-2 
Syntax : chmod octnum file1 

 

The 3 digit octal number represents as follows 
 first digit -- file permissions for the user 
 second digit -- file permissions for the group 
 third digit -- file permissions for others 

FILTERS 

 

1. cut 
■ Used to cut characters or fileds from a file/input 

 

Syntax : cut -cchars filename 
-ffieldnos filename 

 

■ By default, tab is the filed separator(delimiter). If the fileds of the files are separated by 
any other character, we need to specify explicitly by –d option 

 

cut -ddelimitchar -ffileds filname 

 

2. grep 
■ Used to search one or more files for a particular pattern. 

 

Syntax : grep pattern filename(s) 

 

Lines that contain the pattern in the file(s) get displayed 
pattern can be any regular expressions 
More than one files can be searched for a pattern 

 

-v option displays the lines that do not contain the pattern 
-l list only name of the files that contain the pattern 
-n displays also the line number along with the lines that matches the pattern 

 

3. sort 
■ Used to sort the file in order 

 

Syntax : sort filename 

 

Sorts the data as text by default 
Sorts by the first filed by default 

 

-r option sorts the file in descending order 
-u eliminates duplicate lines 
-o filename writes sorted data into the file fname 
-tdchar sorts the file in which fileds are separated by dchar 
-n sorts the data as number 
+1n skip first filed and sort the file by second filed numerically 

 

4. Uniq 
■ Displays unique lines of a sorted file 
Syntax : uniq filename 

SYSTEM ADMIN COMMANDS 

 

INSTALLING SOFTWARE 
To Update the package repositories 
sudo apt-get update 
To update installed software 
sudo apt-get upgrade 
To install a package/software 
sudo apt-get install <package-name> 
To remove a package from the system 
sudo apt-get remove <package-name> 
To reinstall a package 
sudo apt-get install <package-name> --reinstall 

5. echo $PATH ➔ list of pathname where the OS searches for an 
executable file 

